Combating prosecutorial misconduct 2024 






​
Review
Volume 70 |
Number 4
2018
Combating
Prosecutorial Misconduct in Closing Arguments
Michael D.
Cicchini
Follow
this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.law.ou.edu/olr
6 Part of the Courts
Commons, and the Criminal Law Commons
Recommended
Citation
Michael D.
Cicchini, Combating Prosecutorial Misconduct in Closing Arguments,
70 OKLA. L. REv. 887 (2018),
https://digitalcommons.law.ou.edu/olr/vol70/iss4/4
This
Article is brought to you for free and open access by University  College of Law Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion
inLaw Review by an authorized editor of University ofCollege of Law
Digital Commons. For more information, please contact
Law-LibraryDigitalCommons@ou.edu.
​COMBATING
PROSECUTORIAL MISCONDUCT IN
CLOSING ARGUMENTS
MICHAEL D.
CICCHINT'
Prosecutorial misconduct in closing
arguments is rampant. Prosecutors make improper arguments because it is
a highly effective, yet virtually riskfree, strategy. That is, even if the
defense lawyer quickly identifies and objects to the misconduct, the jury
has already heard the improper argument, the available remedies are
toothless, and the offending prosecutor rarely suffers any
consequences. This Article proposes an alternative approach for combating
this problem. Rather than waiting to object until after the prosecutor
makes the improper argument, defense counsel should consider a more
aggressive strategy: the pretrial motion in limine. This motion seeks a pretrial
order to prevent the misconduct before
it occurs,
and in cases where the prosecutor violates the order, it
establishes a framework for
addressing the misconduct in a meaningful way.
This
preemptive strategy has several advantages over the conventional,
reactionary approach.
First, even if the motion in limine fails to deter the misconduct, it alerts the trial
judge to the improper arguments before the prosecutor makes them. Second, it
preserves the issue for meaningful trialcourt review, outside of the jury’s
presence, without defense counsel having to raise difficult and risky
objections in the middle of closing arguments. Third, the motion-in-limine approach
also provides a framework for developing meaningful remedies for
the misconduct. These include providing the opportunity to draft
thoughtful and effective curative instructions and affording time for
client consultation before requesting the more serious remedy of a mistrial.
And fourth, in the event a mistrial is declared, the motion-in-limine
approach may even protect the defendant from re-prosecution.
Table of
Contents
INErOAUCTION. ...cvviiiii e 888
 I.Closing Arguments to the
JUTY ........ccooovviiiiiiiiiiiiiicccecc 890  II.Recognizing IMproper ArgumEnts...........cocveeeeiieiireeniesiesineeneeseens
895 
* Criminal
Defense Lawyer, Cicchini Law Office, LLC, Kenosha, Wisconsin.
J.D.,
summa cum
laude, Marquette University Law School (1999); C.P.A., University
of Illinois Board of
Examiners (1997); M.B.A., Marquette University Graduate School
(1994); B.S., University
of Wisconsin—Parkside (1990).
887
​ Testifying:You’re
Damned if You Do.......cooveviiviiiiiiniiiiieiienn, 896
B.  Testifying: You’reDamned if You Don’t........ccccovveiviiiniininnnnenn, 897 C.
 Liar, Liar (andother Name Calling) ...........ccccoovvieviiiiiiiniicniennnnn. 899 D.  Disparaging
the Defense LAWYET........cccovveviiiniiiieiiiiiiciiecn, 900 E.  Vouching and
Personal Opinion............cccoevviiiiiieiiienieiienneenn, 902F.  Prosecutor “TesStimOny™ .........ccccovviiiuiiiieiieiiiieiieiie
s 903 G. Misstating the Law
........cccooiiiiiiiiiiiiiiciiecic e ccecse 905H.  Straw MenN.....ooooviiiiiiiii 908
L  Sweet EMOtION......ccoiiiiiiiiiiicicie ecccc c 909 J.
 UninvitedRESPONSE ......coveiiiiiiiiiiiiiciiciiecie
e 911 III.  The ReactionaryApproach ...........ccccevviiiiiniiiiiiiiiiieiiesee s
ee 913 A.  TheDecision t0 OBJECt .....cuiiiviiviiiiiiiiiiieiiece
e esec e 913 B. The Problem of Remedies.........c.ccoeriiiiiiininiiiiiicnicicccice 915
1.  Curative INStructions .........c.coeieeriiicniiicie e916 2  MISHIAL
o 917 C. The Risk of
Not ObJecting ........cocvevvuiiriiiriieiiiienieiieii eeci e 920 IV, A SIMPIE Plan .....ooviiiiiiiiiiiiieiccsc e 922
AL  Plan ObJECtiVES.......iivviiiiiiiiiiiiicciiecit ettt 922B.  Pretrial Motion in
LIMine .........cccoeveiieniniininicninicnccesecee s 923C.  Trial
Procedure.........c.coviiiiiiiiiiicinieics e eces e925    
    
    
1. Decide
Whether t0 ObJect ......cc.evvvviiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiicciecie 926
2. Request
a Post-argument Hearing.............coocevvvveiienienieinienins
926
3.
Consider a Mistrial Motion..........cccoceveriiiinieniniencnecccec
927  D.Other Mistrial-Related
ISSUES.........cccooveviiiiiiiiiiiiicccce 927 
CONCIUSION...t 930 
AppendixA: Motion in LIMING.......cccovieviiiiieiiiiiiieiicnieceeeies
e ie 931 
AppendixB: Curative InStructions...........ccoevvevieiiienieiiieiiieiiesieseneen
939


Introduction When a prosecutor makes improper
closing arguments to a jury, he or she violates the defendant’s due
process and other constitutional rights. Yet, despite the prosecutor’s supposed
role as “minister of justice,” rampant prosecutorial misconduct in closing
argument still exists. Anecdotal reports, appellate court decisions, and even
published studies demonstrate that such misconduct has become the norm
rather than the exception.
Prosecutors abuse the closing
argument process for two primary reasons. First, they know that improper
arguments are highly effective, stirring jurors’ emotions and inviting them
to convict for reasons other than proof beyond a reasonable doubt. Second,
and equally important, prosecutors have learned that this form of
misconduct is virtually risk free: the difficulty ​defense lawyers face in quickly
identifying and immediately responding to improper arguments typically results
in the prosecutor’s misconduct going unchecked and the state gaining an
illegal advantage without repercussion. Moreover, even when the defense lawyer
is able to quickly identify and object to the misconduct, doing so may
cause more harm than good. Further, the available remedies are
often ineffective.
Worse yet,
the conventional, reactionary approach to improper argument
only encourages this form
of prosecutorial misconduct. This Article therefore proposes a more aggressive
strategy for combating—and possibly even deterring—prosecutorial
misconduct in closing arguments: the pretrial motion in limine.
Part I
discusses the importance of closing arguments and the widespread
nature of prosecutorial
misconduct in this phase of the criminal trial. Part II takes the first step in combating
this form of misconduct by helping the defense lawyer identify and
understand many common forms of improper argument. Part III examines the
numerous problems with the conventional, after-the-fact approach to dealing
with prosecutorial misconduct, including the risks associated with objecting
in the middle of closing arguments and the general ineffectiveness of the
available remedies when an objection is sustained.
Part IV of
this Article then outlines the alternative approach to combating this form of prosecutorial
misconduct. Instead of waiting for the improper argument and then objecting
after the jury hears it, defense counsel should anticipate and
preempt the misconduct via a pretrial motion in limine. This motion-in-limine
approach educates the trial judge about the various forms of improper argument,
seeks a pretrial order prohibiting these arguments before the prosecutor can
make them, and protects the defendant in the event the prosecutor violates
the court’s order. If granted, the pretrial motion in limine relieves defense
counsel from having to raise risky, midargument objections to the
misconduct, yet still preserves the issue for trialand appellate-court review. The
motion in limine also establishes a framework for developing meaningful
remedies for the prosecutor’s unethical behavior. It provides
defense counsel and the trial judge the opportunity to craft effective
curative instructions and affords defense counsel sufficient time to consult
with the defendant before requesting the serious remedy of a mistrial.
Further, in the event the court grants a mistrial request, the motion-in-limine
approach may even protect the defendant from a retrial.
Appendix A
provides a sample motion in limine, and Appendix B provides sample curative
instructions tailored to specific types of improper
​arguments. Such instructions can, in
some cases, provide an adequate remedy for the prosecutor’s
misconduct.
 L.Closing Arguments
to the Jury  Closingarguments are “often viewed as the
most important part of the  trial,providing the attorneys with their
last opportunity to convince the jury  ofthe defendant’s guilt or innocence.”'
More specifically, the closing  argumentallows the attorneys “to sum
up the evidence within a narrative  frameworkto help the jury understand
and interpret the evidence.”* This  includesarguing about the “reasonable
inferences to be drawn from the  evidence,”the “credibility and demeanor
of witnesses,” and the “credibility  ofevidence generally.” The attorneys
may also “help the jury understand  theissues by applying the evidence to
the law.”* In the rebuttal portion of  theclosing argument, the prosecutor may
“respond to arguments of  [defense]counsel.” 
With
regard to criminal prosecutions, courts have stated that the
prosecutor “occupies a
semijudicial position,”® and the rules of professional conduct have grandly ordained the
prosecutor as “minister of justice.”’ Consequently, “a prosecutor’s duty,
above being an advocate for the State, is to ensure that a defendant is
afforded a fair trial.”® Yet, despite these grand titles and lofty standards,
prosecutorial misconduct is rampant in closing argument, its variety
limited only by the prosecutor’s imagination
1. Michael
Lyon, Avoiding the Woodshed: The Third Circuit Examines
Prosecutorial Misconduct
in Closing Argument in United States v. Wood, 53 ViLL. L. REv. 689,
689 (2008) (citing Michael
Frost, Ethos, Pathos & Legal Audience, 99 Dick. L. REv. 85,
113
(1994)).
2. Mary
Nicol Bowman, Mitigating Foul Blows, 49 Ga. L. REv. 309, 320 (2015)
(citing Albert W.
Alschuler, Courtroom Misconduct by Prosecutors and Trial Judges,
50
Tex. L.
REV. 629, 643 (1972)).
3. J.
Thomas Sullivan, Prosecutor Misconduct in Closing Argument in
Arkansas Criminal Trials,
20 U. ARK. LITTLE Rock L.J. 213, 219 (1998) (first citing Richmond
v. State, 899 S.W.2d 64
(Ark. 1999); then citing Shannon v. State, 942 S.W.2d 591, 597
(Tex. Crim. App.
1996)).
4. Terry
v. State, 668 So. 2d 954, 963 (Fla. 1996).
5. Bowman,
supra note 2, at 320 (citing Craig Lee Montz, Why Lawyers Continue
to Cross the Line in
Closing Arguments: An Examination of Federal and State Cases, 28
OHIO
N.U.L.REv.
67, 73 (2001)).
6. Roach
v. State, 146 So. 240, 240 (Fla. 1933). 7. MOoDEL RULES OF PROF’L CONDUCT 1.
3.8 cmt. 1 (AM. BAR Ass’N 2017).
8. Claire
Gagnon, 4 Liar by Any Other Name? lowa's Closing Argument
Conundrum,
55 DRAKE
L. REv. 471, 478 (2007) (citing State v. Graves, 668 N.W.2d 860,
876 (lowa
2003)).
​and
boldness.” In many cases, improper prosecutorial arguments violate
a defendant’s due process
rights'® and, depending on the particular argument, other constitutional rights."’
A prosecutor
often commits this form of misconduct because, by the end
of the jury trial, he or she
“may have become so devoted to winning the case . . . that his or her emotions
intrude and result in a ‘win at all costs’ closing argument not based on the
facts brought out during trial.”"> One explanation for this behavior is that
“[c]Jonfirmation bias leads prosecutors to be overconfident in their
conclusions about the guilt of particular defendants.”” This process is often
set in motion when the prosecutor’s office first receives a referral
from law enforcement and, despite having limited information, concludes that
the suspect is guilty."* Then, throughout the case, the prosecutor focuses on
information that confirms this preexisting determination of guilt
while discounting—or even ignoring— information that contradicts
it."
Regardless
of the underlying explanation, prosecutorial misconduct in
closing argument can be
incredibly harmful. “Although argument does not constitute evidence and the jury is
instructed not to consider it as such, the use of dramatic, compelling, or even
inflammatory argument reflects a perception that argument is a
valuable ingredient of the deliberative process. . . .”'° And scientific
evidence supports this perception: “Empirical research on the ‘recency effect’
suggests that people tend to remember best
9. See
infra Part IL
10. See,
e.g., State v. Graves, 668 N.W.2d 860, 867 (lowa 2003); State v.
Singh, 793 A.2d 226, 232
(Conn. 2002).
11. See,
eg., Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609, 615 (1965) (finding that
the prosecutor’s comment
on the defendant’s decision not to testify was improper and
violated the Fifth
Amendment); State v. Jackson, 444 S.W.3d 554, 589 (Tenn. 2014)
(same); State v. Jorgensen, 754 N.W.2d 77, 90 (Wis.
2008) (stating that the prosecutor’s argument about facts not adduced at trial violated
defendant’s Sixth Amendment right of confrontation). 12. Candice D. Tobin, Prosecutorial
Misconduct During Closing Argument: Florida
Case Law,
22 Nova L. REv. 485, 488 (1997).
13.
Bowman, supra note 2, at 329 (citing Keith A. Findley & Michael
S. Scott, The Multiple
Dimensions of Tunnel Vision in Criminal Cases, 2006 Wis. L. REv.
291, 371).
14. See
id. (citing Findlay & Scott, supra note 13, at 329-30) (“The
information provided to
prosecutors may be incomplete because the police investigation may
have been shaped by tunnel
vision.”).
15. See
id. (citing Barbara O’Brien, Prime Suspect: An Examination of
Factors that Aggravate and
Counteract Confirmation Bias in Criminal Investigations, 15
PSYCHOL. PUB. PoL’y &
L. 315, 316 (2009)) (“Because of confirmation bias, people
unwittingly select and interpret information to support
their preexisting beliefs.”).
16.
Sullivan, supra note 3, at 214.
​and be
influenced by the latest event in a sequence more than by earlier
events.”'” Because jurors
enter deliberations with closing arguments— especially the prosecutor’s
rebuttal—still ringing in their ears, those words could have more impact than the actual
evidence presented much earlier in the case.'
Although
other empirical research demonstrates that some jurors will
have made up their minds by
the time closing argument begins," such findings do not minimize the harmful
effects of the prosecutor’s misconduct. Even though some jurors
may have already decided the defendant’s guilt, the prosecutor’s
closing argument provides “ammunition for them to use in the jury room ‘so
that they can become an extension of the advocate.”*
Further,
prosecutorial misconduct may be as frequent as it is harmful. As
far back as 1987, for
example, one judge conceded that prosecutorial misconduct in closing argument is
“chronicled with alarming regularity.”*' Nonetheless, he maintained that the
“majority of prosecutors . . . desire to see that justice is done rather than
to add another conviction to their record.”” But attributing the
misconduct to only a few bad apples was probably a naive claim, even in
1987. Today, any criminal defense lawyer who adopts such a trusting approach
does so at his or her client’s peril. In my own experience, the majority of
prosecutors routinely make improper arguments to the jury—indeed,
prosecutorial misconduct in closing argument seems to be the rule rather
than the exception. Moreover, some forms of improper argument are
deployed with such frequency, and by so many different prosecutors, that
there is reason to speculate that such arguments may be a part of the
prosecutors’ training. And much of the empirical evidence on the
pervasiveness of such misconduct supports this
17.
Bowman, supra note 2, at 344 (emphasis added) (citing Ryan Patrick
Alford, Catalyzing More
Adequate Federal Habeas Review of Summation Misconduct: Persuasion
Theory and the Sixth
Amendment Right to an Unbiased Jury, 59 OKLA. L. REv. 479, 518
(2006)).
18. See
Welsh White, Curbing Prosecutorial Misconduct in Capital Cases:
Imposing Prohibitions on
Improper Penalty Trial Arguments, 39 Am. CriM. L. REv. 1147, 1149
(2002) (“[TJn most cases,
the prosecutor’s final closing argument will be the last words that
the . . . jury hears from
either attorney.”).
19. See
Gagnon, supra note 8, at 474.
20.
Bowman, supra note 2, at 343 (quoting H. Mitchell Caldwell et al., The Art
and Architecture  ofClosing
Argument, 76 TUL. L. REv. 961, 972 (2002)).  
21. Frank
D. Celebrezze, Prosecutorial Misconduct: Quelling the Tide of
Improper Comment to the
Jury, 35 CLEv. ST. L. REv. 237, 238 (1987).
22. Id.
at247.
​anecdotal
evidence.” Therefore, the well-prepared criminal defense lawyer
must enter each jury trial
expecting the prosecutor to strike “foul blows.”**
The reason
for this miserable state of affairs is twofold. First, prosecutors
know they are likely to get
away with this form of misbehavior, as “misconduct in jury argument proves to
be one of the most difficult problems to address for criminal
defense counsel.” This is because defense lawyers are unable to
recognize many forms of improper argument and, even when they do, the
misconduct typically happens too quickly to mount a thoughtful and effective
response.*
And
second, appellate courts have proven to be highly tolerant of this
form of prosecutorial
misconduct. For example, in Briggs v. State, the defendant’s appellate lawyer argued
that the Florida Court of Appeals had repeatedly warned prosecutors that a
particular type of argument was unethical and constituted
misconduct.”” As such, the lawyer asked the court to make good on its seven previous
warnings to prosecutors and order a new trial—one where the defendant
Briggs could be tried free of improper
argl.lmcnt.28
The
court’s response to the lawyer’s request was the same as its
response in the previous
seven cases cited by the appellate lawyer: “Jf [the improper
argument] continues, the
appellate courts will be compelled, as appellant’s counsel argues, to fashion a special
remedy and reverse convictions so obtained to provide an effective
means of deterring further misconduct.”” Despite this further admonishment,
however, the court again failed to act in a meaningful way to protect Briggs
(and other future defendants) from
23. See,
e.g., Bowman, supra note 2, at 332 (discussing an empirical study
demonstrating pervasive
prosecutorial misconduct in California criminal trials); Paul J.
Spiegelman, Prosecutorial
Misconduct in Closing Argument: The Role of Intent in Appellate
Review, 1 1. App. PRAC.
& PrROCESS 115, 120 (1999) (discussing evidence of
“‘prosecutorial recidivism’—the tendency of the same
prosecutor or office to engage in misconduct repeatedly, even in the face of
admonishments from the court™).
24.
Bowman, supra note 2, at 312 (citing the landmark case of Berger v.
United States,
295 U.S.
78 (1935), noting the “striking gap™ between “the strong rhetoric
of Berger and . . . the
realities of prosecutors’ behavior,” and explaining how Berger’s
condemnation of prosecutorial misconduct is
“routinely cited but largely ignored”).
25.
Sullivan, supra note 3, at 214.
26. See
Michael D. Cicchini, Prosecutorial Misconduct at Trial: A New
Perspective Rooted in
Confrontation Clause Jurisprudence, 37 SETON HALL L. REv. 335,
340-42 (2007) (discussing
the challenges facing defense lawyers when attempting to deal with
trial misconduct
generally).
27. Briggs
v. State, 455 So. 2d 519, 521-22 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1984).
28. Id. at
522.
29. Id.
(emphasis added).
​prosecutorial misconduct. Prosecutors
do not fear such tired judicial mantras, though, as evidenced the
court’s own admission that “for over 30 years such prosecutorial tactics have
been disapproved of, yet they continue to occur.” In the absence of
meaningful action to prevent such misconduct, prosecutors have
accurately interpreted the court’s eighth warning as yet another idle threat in
a very long line of idle threats.
A California
appellate court dealt with prosecutorial misconduct by using
similarly empty warnings.
After repeated incidents of misconduct by the same prosecutor in several cases,
the court bemoaned:
[1]t is
disheartening, to say the least, to learn that [the prosecutor]
takes ‘pride’ in our
admonitions, apparently because we did not reverse the judgment rendered. We
most earnestly urge counsel to reconsider her approach /lest in
the future it becomes necessary for us to reverse otherwise
sustainable convictions . . ..”' The problem for California
defendants, however, is the same as that faced by Florida defendants: the future
never comes.
For many
decades, other courts throughout the country have dealt similarly with the problem of
prosecutorial misconduct, issuing myriad warnings to prosecutors to stop
making improper closing arguments.” However, as in Florida and
California, these judicial threats are nearly always empty and free of consequence
for the offending prosecutors.
While most
appellate judges timidly ask prosecutors to abide by the rules
of ethics and trial
procedure, one judge has recognized that this “attitude of
helpless piety is, I
think, undesirable.”” Such an attitude is indeed “undesirable” for three reasons.
First, it demonstrates that appellate courts are unable to control the
prosecutorial monster they have helped create, thus exposing the courts’ ineffectiveness
(or, at bare minimum, unwillingness) to put an end to the conduct.
Second, and more significantly, such “helpless piety” does nothing for the
defendants who were victimized by the
30. Id
31. People
v. Congious, No. B0202709 (Cal. Ct. App. Dec. 4, 1987) (emphasis
added), quoted in
Cicchini, supra note 26, at 348.
32. See,
e.g., United States v. Vargas, 583 F.2d 380 (7th Cir. 1978)
(“Unfortunately, such
improprieties are not rare grounds for appeal in this Circuit, and
neither are our . . . cautions to the government in such
cases.”) (examining numerous cases involving improper
arguments).
33. United
States v. Antonelli Fireworks Co., 155 F.2d 631, 661 (2d Cir. 1946)
(Frank, J.,
dissenting).
​prosecutor’s misconduct. And third,
it certainly does nothing to prevent the victimization of future
defendants.
Given the
current state of affairs, what, if anything, can criminal defense
lawyers do at the
trial-court level to protect their clients? Rather than waiting until closing statements to
react to improper arguments made by the prosecutor, defense lawyers should
take preemptive measures in order to effectively battle this form of
misconduct—one that, all too often, has come to be expected.™
II.
Recognizing Improper Arguments
Battling
prosecutorial misconduct in closing argument begins with learning what constitutes an
improper argument. Part I of this Article set forth the bounds of a legally
proper argument.” In theory, then, anything outside of those bounds is
improper. But such a formulation is not easily applied in practice. Therefore, the
following sections provide concrete examples of improper arguments
grouped into general categories, the goal of which is to make it easier for
the criminal defense lawyer to recognize prosecutorial misconduct when he or
she hears it at trial.
It is
important, however, to keep three things in mind. First, this
Article makes no attempt
to list all examples—or even to identify all categories— of improper argument. The
variations of misconduct in closing arguments are far too numerous to be easily
catalogued in a single article. Second, while there is broad agreement
across jurisdictions as to what constitutes an improper argument, the
determination sometimes depends on the law of the specific federal circuit, state, or
federal district within a state. And third, for some types of prosecutorial
argument, what qualifies as improper may depend upon the facts of the
particular case.™
Given
this, every defense lawyer must become familiar with the law
applicable to his or her
case and, equally important, must understand how that law applies to different
factual scenarios. Keeping these caveats in mind, what follow are examples of
common—but often improper—closing
arguments.
34. See
infra Part IIL
35. See
supra text accompanying notes 1-5.
36. For a
single case that highlights the importance of a
facts-and-circumstances analysis and also demonstrates
differences between the law of two jurisdictions, see Freeman v. Lane, 962 F.2d 1252,
1254-56 (7th Cir. 1992).
​ Testifying:You're
Damned if You Do  
As late as
the 1960s, some prosecutors were able to win convictions by
preventing defendants from
testifying at trial.”’ Today, however, courts recognize a defendant’s
constitutional right to testify in his or her own defense.”® And to ensure this right
has real meaning, courts often instruct juries that “you should not discredit
the testimony just because the defendant is charged with a crime.””
Yet prosecutors have developed arguments to accomplish exactly
what the law prohibits: they urge juries to disregard the defendant’s testimony
simply because he or she is the defendant. For example, one
prosecutor argued to the jury:
“[Wihat’s
her interest, bias or prejudice? Well, she’s the Defendant here, she stands a chance
of getting convicted. That’s one very large reason she should
have of trying to slant her testimony, of trying to shift the
blame away. It’s not pleasant to be convicted, especially at her
age.”*
In a
different case, the prosecutor similarly argued:
“[Wihat
is his interest, bias or prejudice? Well, he’s the one on
trial here. You recall
his testimony. He’s a 17 year old male attending [high school], getting
ready to enter into adulthood. Do you think he’d want to go through
the rest of his life with a conviction[?]”"
In both
cases, the Illinois court held that this type of argument was
improper as it “implied
that the defendant lied simply because of his [or
37. See
Ferguson v. Georgia, 365 U.S. 570, 571 (1961) (“In this case, a
jury . . . convicted the
appellant of murder, and he is under sentence of death. After the
State rested its case at
the trial, the appellant’s counsel called him to the stand, but the
trial judge sustained the
State’s objection to counsel’s attempt to question him.”).
38. See,
e.g., Rock v. Arkansas, 483 U.S. 44, 62 (1987) (finding that a
“rule excluding all
posthypnosis testimony infringers impermissibly on the right of a
defendant to testify on his own behalf”); see also Timothy
P. O’Neill, Vindicating the Defendant’s Constitutional Right to Testify at a Criminal
Trial: The Need for an On-the-Record Waiver, 51 U. PITT. L.
REV. 809, 809 (1990)
(“[TThe Supreme Court has directly held that a criminal defendant
has a constitutional
right to testify at her trial.”).
39. Wis.
J.I. Crim. 300 (2016) (emphasis added).
40.
People v. Crowder, 607 N.E.2d 277, 280 (Ill. App. Ct. 1993).
41.
People v. Watts, 588 N.E.2d 405, 407 (Ill. App. Ct. 1992).
Apparently, age is a nowin factor for a defendant; whether
young or old, the prosecutor will spin it into evidence of
perjury.
​her]
status as a defendant.”* In other words, arguing that a defendant’s
testimony should be
discredited, dismissed, or ignored because he or she is the defendant is, in substance, the
equivalent of preventing him or her from testifying in the first
place—something the Supreme Court has already deemed unconstitutional.” The
prosecutor must not be allowed to accomplish the same end by different
means.
Worse yet,
this prosecutorial argument violates an even more important
constitutional principle:
the presumption of innocence. This can be demonstrated in three simple but
irrefutable steps. First, in any criminal case involving the defendant’s
testimony, the prosecutor takes the position that the defendant is guilty, but
the defendant testifies that he or she is innocent. Second, to argue that the
defendant is lying (or slanting his or her testimony or shifting blame)
because of his or her status as a defendant necessarily implies that the
defendant is guilty. That, after all, is the whole point of the prosecutor’s argument.
And third, to argue that a person is guilty merely because he or she has
been charged with a crime is blatantly unconstitutional, as such arguments
“diminish the defendant’s fundamental right to the presumption of
innocence.”*
Whether
based on the defendant’s right to testify or his or her right to a
presumption of innocence,
arguments that the defendant’s testimony should be disregarded based solely on his
or her status as the defendant are improper; defense counsel must be
able to recognize when the prosecutor is engaging in misconduct by making
such arguments.
 B.Testifving:
You're Damned if You Don'’t 
For a
variety of reasons, many defendants choose to exercise their
constitutional right to
remain silent at trial. “It is not every one who can safely venture on the witness
stand, though entirely innocent of the charge against him.”* And the law is
clear: a defendant “has a right to a jury instruction that his silence is not
evidence of his guilt.”% Yet, in cases where defendants elect to remain
silent, prosecutors are quick to spin this
42. Id.;
cf. People v. Armstrong, 655 N.E.2d 1203, 1205-06 (Ill. App. Ct.
1995) (“We respectfully
disagree with our esteemed colleagues [who decided Crowder and
Watts]. . . . Surely the
fact that the defendants were charged . . . constituted a bias
affecting the credibility
of these defendants.”).
43. See
Ferguson v. Georgia, 365 U.S. 570 (1961).
44.
Crowder, 607 N.E.2d at 280.
45.
Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609, 613 (1965).
46.
Sharon R. Gromer, Fifth Amendment—The Right to a No “Adverse
Inference” Jury
Instruction, 72 J. CRim. L. &
CrimINoLOGY 1307, 1307 (1


​silence to
the government’s advantage.*” Modern prosecutors normally do
not explicitly argue that a
defendant’s silence at trial means that he or she is guilty. Such a bold claim would be a
blatant (but not necessarily reversible) error.” Instead, prosecutors “seem to
keep coming up with arguments which can have a double meaning,”®
thus maintaining the thrust of the message, while at the same time
giving the abusive prosecutors plausible— or in many cases,
implausible—deniability.
Improper
comments on the defendant’s decision not to testify appear in
seemingly infinite
variety. In one recent case, a prosecutor began rebuttal argument “by walking across the
court room, facing Defendant, and declaring in a loud voice, while
raising both arms to point at and gesture toward Defendant, ‘Just tell us
where you were! That’s all we are asking, Noura!”*
In a more
subtle example, another prosecutor argued to a jury that “God
forbid you should believe
a police officer whose testimony went uncontradicted by these
Defendants.”' Similarly, another prosecutor argued that there were only two
people present for an alleged sexual assault, and the “rape victim was
the only person to have testified concerning events occurring in the
room where . . . [the] defendant had raped her.”*
In
perhaps the height of craftiness, another prosecutor argued to the
jurors that they “should
not take into consideration in any way the fact that [the] defendant did not testify,”
which the court held was a disguised but
47. This
Article addresses only improper arguments regarding the defendant’s
decision to remain silent
at trial. It does not address pretrial silence, the admissibility
of which could turn on
whether the defendant testifies at trial and whether the pre-trial
silence occurred before
or after Miranda warnings. See Sandra Guerra Thompson, Evading
Miranda: How Seibert and
Patane Failed to “Save” Miranda, 40 VaL. U. L. REv. 645, 647 (2006) (discussing the 
admissibilityof pre-Miranda
silence).   
48. See
Sullivan, supra note 3, at 230-31 n.98 (discussing the Court’s use
of the “harmless error”
test as a way to uphold convictions despite prosecutorial comments
on the defendant’s
silence).
49. Spry
v. State, 664 So. 2d 41, 41-42 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1995).
50. State
v. Jackson, 444 S.W.3d 554, 585 (Tenn. 2014) (finding argument
improper and reversible
error).
51.
Knight v. State, 672 So. 2d 590, 591 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1996)
(emphasis added) (finding
argument improper and reversible error).
52.
Sullivan, supra note 3, at 232 (emphasis added) (discussing Bailey
v. State, 697 S.W.2d 110
(Ark. 1985) (finding argument improper and reversible error)); see
also Freeman v. Lane, 962
F.2d 1252, 1254 (7th Cir. 1992) (finding argument improper and
reversible error because
the defendant was the only person who could have rebutted the
state’s evidence).
​“deliberate attempt to call attention
to defendant’s failure to testify.”™ Regardless of the form of the
argument, however, any direct, indirect, or even disguised comment on the
defendant’s silence violates the defendant’s due process rights and the Fifth
Amendment privilege against selfincrimination and are therefore
improper.
 C.Liar, Liar
(and other Name Calling) 
Prosecutors sometimes argue that
defendants are not believable simply because they are charged with a
crime. Other times, however, prosecutors are more direct and simply call the
defendant (or other defense witness) a liar or brand the person with
equally harmful labels.
In some
jurisdictions, calling the defendant a liar is, at least in theory,
per se improper as it is
considered an inflammatory label.”* In other jurisdictions, prosecutors may get
away with such name-calling if it is closely tied to evidence adduced at
trial. For example, when “the witness told four different stories” when
testifying, it may be proper to discuss those conflicting stories and then
argue that the witness is “the biggest liar in [the] [c]ounty.”” That is, it
may be permissible “to call the defendant or a witness a ‘liar’ if conflicts in
evidence make such an assertion a fair inference.”
Prosecutors are often creative and
build upon the words “lie” or “lying” or “liar.” One prosecutor went well
beyond the pale in closing argument when discussing the defendant’s
testimony:
Joseph
Goebbels, who was a propaganda minister for Germany back at the time of Adolf Hitler,
had a theory. He believed that you should lie to the people but
that you shouldn’t lie with small lies because you can get caught in
small lies. What you should do is you should lie big, come up
with a big lie because that’s something that you might be able to
have the people buy is the big lie. Of course, at that time it
was that the Jews were
53.
Spiegelman, supra note 23, at 138 n.89 (discussing United States v.
Roberts, 119 F.3d 1006
(Ist Cir. 1997) (finding argument improper and, when combined with
other errors, reversible
error)).
54. See
Gagnon, supra note 8, at 483-84 (discussing how Iowa’s supposed
“bright line test” is
“not all that bright”); see also O’Callaghan v. State, 429 So.2d
691, 696 (Fla. 1983) (stating that it is “unquestionably
improper” to call the defendant a liar).
55.
Chandler v. Moore, 240 F.3d 907, 914 (11th Cir. 2001).
56.
People v. Starks, 451 N.E.2d 1298, 1305 (Ill. App. Ct. 1983); see
also Craig v. State, 510
So. 2d 857, 865 (Fla. 1987) (finding that the prosecutor may call
defendant a liar if
supported by the trial evidence).
​responsible for everything that was
wrong in the world and they should be exterminated. Well, the
defense in this case is nothing but a big lie.”’
Most
prosecutors aren’t brash enough to invoke Nazi Germany and then
strain to find a way to
associate the defendant with it. Many prosecutors will, however, brand the defendant
with other negative labels in addition to that of liar. Depending on the facts
of the case and the nature of the prosecutor’s argument, name-calling
such as “dope pusher,”** “hoodlum,”* and “unpredictable animal”® could
very well be considered inflammatory, improper, and even reversible
error.
 D.Disparaging
the Defense Lawyer 
When
prosecutors aren’t criticizing the defendant or the defendant’s
witnesses, they are often
disparaging the defendant’s lawyer. This type of argument is improper because it
“can prejudice the defendant by . . . inducing the jury to give greater
weight to the government’s view of the case.”
Attacks
on defense counsel can take several forms, beginning with
criticism disguised as
compliment. For example, in a classic case of false flattery, one prosecutor
“backhandedly compliment[ed] defense counsel on his skill in confusing the alleged
victim of a sexual assault when crossexamining her,” and then
distinguished the dishonorable goals of the defense lawyer from the noble
objectives of “the government and the judge.”® More commonly, prosecutors
go after defense counsel via a “more direct” route.”’ Instead of arguing
about the evidence, many prosecutors have attacked “the personal
integrity of defense counsel by suggesting that counsel was not being truthful.”®
Not mincing words, one prosecutor told
57.
Washington v. State, 687 So. 2d 279 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1997).
58. Mays
v. State, 571 S.W.2d 429, 430 (Ark. 1978).
59. Hall
v. United States, 419 F.2d 582, 587 (5th Cir. 1969).
60. State
v. McGregor, 244 So. 2d 846, 846 (La. 1971). 61. United States v. Xiong, 262
F.3d 672, 675 (7th Cir. 2001).
62.
Spiegelman, supra note 23, at 136 n.83 (discussing United States v.
Frederick, 78 F.3d 1370
(9th Cir. 1996) (finding argument improper and, when combined with
other errors, reversible
error)).
63.
Sullivan, supra note 3, at 246 (discussing indirect and direct
attacks on defense counsel
by the prosecutor).
64.
Briggs v. State, 455 So. 2d 519, 520 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1984)
(finding argument improper but also harmless
error).
​the jury
that the defense lawyer “is either confused or she’s lying or
trying to mislead you.”*
Such
misconduct in closing argument “evidences an excessive preoccupation with obtaining a
conviction at any cost.”® And when prosecutors employ this strategy,
“the state’s closing argument may cause one to wonder who is on trial, the
defendant or the defense counsel.”® In perhaps the most extreme (and
literal) example of putting the defense lawyer on trial, one prosecutor in
an incest case “suggested that defense counsel was also guilty of
incest.”*
Another
variation on this anti-defense-lawyer theme does not attack the
defense lawyer as an
individual, but instead attacks his or her role in the criminal justice system. For
example, one prosecutor argued that, while the prosecutor’s job is to “determine
whether I believe a person is guilty and whether I think [the prosecution
is] just,” the “defense counsel’s job is to get his client off the hook. That’s
his only job here, not to see justice is done but to see that his client is
acquitted.”” This common twist on this form of improper argument allows
prosecutors to kill two birds with one stone: anointing themselves as
justice-seekers while at the same time branding defense lawyers as
obfuscators.”
Prosecutors continue to make these
and similar arguments even though courts have repeatedly stated that
such “disparaging remarks directed at defense counsel are
reprehensible.””" In a broader sense, such remarks also “detract from the dignity of
judicial proceedings.””* As such, regardless of the prosecutor’s angle, all forms
of argument directed at defense counsel should be considered improper.
65. State
v. Lyles, 996 S.W.2d 713, 716 (Mo. Ct. App. 1999) (finding argument
improper but not
preserved at the post-conviction level and not sufficient to
reverse under the higher
standard of plain error).
66.
Briggs, 455 So. 2d at 520.
67.
Tobin, supra note 12, at 495.
68. See
id. at 495-96 n.78; see also Douglass v. State, 184 So. 756, 757
(Fla. 1938).
69. State
v. Mayo, 734 N.W.2d 115, 121 (Wis. 2007) (finding argument improper
but not properly
preserved at trial and not sufficient to reverse under the
ineffective assistance of
counsel
standard, plain error standard, or interests of justice
standard).
70. See,
e.g., United States v. Friedman, 909 F.2d 705, 708-09 (2d Cir.
1990) (arguing that the
role of the defense lawyer is to “try to get them off, perhaps even
for high fees”); Wilson
v. State, 938 S.W.2d 57, 58 (Tex. Crim. App. 1996) (arguing that
defense counsel wishes
“that you turn a guilty man free” and “he can wish that because he
doesn’t have the obligation to see that justice is
done™); People v. Hunt, 242 N.W.2d 45, 47 (Mich. Ct. App.
1976) (arguing that
“defense counsel’s job was ‘to get his man acquitted’”).
71.
United States v. Xiong, 262 F.3d 672, 675 (7th Cir. 2001).
72. Id
​​ Vouchingand
Personal Opinion  
Vouching is
likely the most common form of improper argument, but its
numerous variations can
make it difficult to identify. In general, a prosecutor vouches when he or she
gives a personal opinion about the defendant’s guilt or about a
particular piece of evidence.” This can be problematic, as “[r]esearch
consistently shows that jurors inherently find prosecutors to be more credible than
defense counsel.”” Therefore, “it is improper . . . for a prosecutor to
express a personal belief in the guilt of the accused, or in the veracity of the
state’s witnesses.””
Although
it occurs with some frequency, “[m]ost courts conclude that it
is misconduct for
prosecutors to make ‘I’ statements such as ‘I think’ or ‘I
believe.”’ Some obvious
examples of such blatant vouching include, “I think the defendant is guilty,” or,
“I believe the victim testified truthfully.” Some courts will let prosecutors
get away with vouching, however, if the “I think™ or “I believe” statements
are properly disguised. Examples might include, “I think the evidence in
this case shows the defendant is guilty,” or “I think the physical evidence
proves the victim told the truth.” Therefore, whether this type of argument is
improper is depends on how the language is parsed.”’
In most
cases, prosecutors express their personal opinion of the defendant’s guilt indirectly by
giving their opinion that the government’s witnesses testified truthfully and
therefore the jury should believe them. Prosecutors indirectly vouch for
many types of government witnesses, but they most commonly do so for the
police. That is, prosecutors make “inappropriate attempt[s] to
persuade the jury that the police officer’s testimony should be believed simply
because the witness is a police officer.””
While
offering a personal opinion is, by itself, improper, many
prosecutors compound this
offense by bolstering their opinions with reference to matters outside of the
record. One prosecutor, for example, bolstered his personal opinion of
the defendant’s guilt by explaining to the jury, “I look up police reports. .
. . I determine whether I believe a person is
73. See
Bowman, supra note 2, at 321.
74. Id. at
322-23.
75.
Tobin, supra note 12, at 503. 76. Bowman, supra note 2, at
321-22.
77. See
Craig Lee Montz, Trial Objections from Beginning to End: The
Handboof k or Civil and
Criminal Trials, 29 Pepp. L. REv. 243, 307-08 (2002) (discussing
cases where the prosecutor’s personal opinions were
permitted).
78.
Cisneros v. State, 678 So. 2d 888, 890 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App.
1996).
​guilty and
whether I think it’s just. I also have the discretion . . . to
dismiss the charges if I
think they’re unjust, if they didn’t happen, if it’s not provable.””
While
vouching for several police officers, another prosecutor argued
that the police witnesses
must be believed because, before they can become police officers, they “take oaths to
follow the law and so do not ‘stick’ people with charges.”* The prosecutor
specifically argued that, during their induction ceremonies, “Officer
Gammon took an oath to uphold the laws” and “Detective Arkins took the same
oath.”®' Therefore, in order to acquit the defendant, the prosecutor
contended, the jurors would have to believe these police witnesses consciously
violated their oaths, as well as their oaths at trial, and “lied on the
stand.”® Such vouching, especially when based on facts not in evidence,
constitutes misconduct by the prosecutor.  F.Prosecutor “Testimony” 
When
prosecutors aren’t vouching for the state’s witnesses or evidence,
they sometimes offer
their own testimony, thus creating evidence out of thin air. Although the law is clear
that “counsel has no right to create evidence or to misstate the facts”®
and that any “[a]Jrgument on matters not in evidence is improper,”*
prosecutors often “testify” in closing argument nonetheless.
The most
egregious example of prosecutor testimony occurs when a prosecutor argues facts that he or
she knows to be false. For example, in one case a prosecutor argued to the
jury that the defendant “never denied [committing] the crime until he got
on the witness stand.”™® This might have been a proper argument had there
been evidence at trial of the defendant’s pre-arrest and pre-Miranda silence.
But in this case, the prosecutor “knew
79. State
v. Mayo, 2007 WI 78, q 16, 301 Wis. 2d 642, 734 N.W.2d 115
(alterations in
original).
80.
United States v. Cornett, 232 F.3d 570, 573 (7th Cir. 2000).
81. Id
82. Id
83. State
v. Thornton, 498 N.W.2d 670, 676 (lowa 1993); see also United
States v.
Donato,
99 F.3d 426 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (reversing in part for prosecutor
misstating evidence); United States v. Forlorma, 94 F.3d
91 (2d Cir. 1996) (reversal for prosecutor’s repeated,
incorrect
claims about the evidence); Bowman, supra note 2, at 323 (“For
example,
prosecutors commit misconduct when
they exaggerate what the testimony shows, including forensic evidence.”).
84. State
v. Neuser, 528 N.W.2d 49, 54 (Ct. App. Wis. 1995) (quoting State v.
Albright,
298
N.W.2d 196, 203 (Wis. Ct. App. 1980)).
85. State
v. Weiss, 2008 WI App 72,9 15, 312 Wis. 2d 382, 752 N.W.2d 372.
​better”
because she had two different police reports detailing how the
defendant had denied
committing the crime long before he took the witness stand.® The argument was therefore
improper, as “[p]rosecutors may not ask jurors to draw inferences that
they know or should know are not true.”™’
In other
cases, prosecutors argue facts that might be true but prevent the
introduction of evidence
proving or disproving the facts and deny defense counsel the opportunity to challenge
the facts by waiting to discuss them until closing arguments. This tactic
violates both due process and the right of confrontation: “Testimony from a
prosecutor is difficult enough to overcome, but it is impossible for
a defendant to test or counter a prosecutor’s ‘testimony’ when the
defendant is denied his right to confront the prosecutor as a witness.”™
In one
example of this tactic, a defendant testified he was out-of-town
“at the Luxor Hotel in
Las Vegas at the time” in question.” Instead of presenting contrary evidence at
trial, the prosecutor waited until closing argument and “testified” that he
knew the defendant was not at the Luxor because, the prosecutor said, “I
was able to have members of my staff telephone the Luxor,” thus implying
that the defendant had lied.” In a different case—one alleging child
sexual assault—a prosecutor argued that, because the defendant “had been
sexually abused” herself as a child, she was “more likely to have committed
the alleged sexual assaults in this case.””" This prosecutorial
testimony was a twist on the “battering parent syndrome,” but “was improper . . .
because it was unsupported by expert testimony™ at trial.”*
The above
examples are relatively easy for defense counsel to recognize.
Sometimes, however,
prosecutors do a better job of disguising their factual assertions as argument. For
example, one prosecutor argued that the defendant in a drug case was able
to post his $10,000 bond because he “could go out the next day and make
$10,000 up on one transaction.”” This was improper because, during the
evidence portion of trial, the prosecutor did not “even attempt to prove that
[the defendant] had received any money
86. Id.
87. Id
88. State
v. Jorgensen, 2008 W1 60, 38, 310 Wis. 2d 138, 754 N.W.2d 77.
89.
Cicchini, supra note 26, at 353. 90. Id.
91. State
v. Pulizzano, 456 N.W.2d 3235, 335 (Wis. 1990).
92. Id. at
336. 93. United States v.
Vargas, 583 F.2d 380, 386 (7th Cir. 1978).
​as a
result of any [drug] deals”—not even the alleged delivery with
which the defendant was
charged.”
In another
case, a defendant was charged with arson, and the government
had seized his clothing to
test for gasoline.” Defense counsel properly argued that the test came back
negative, thus pointing to the defendant’s innocence. The prosecutor, however,
responded “by speculating that the reason for that fact could be that
the defendant had destroyed the clothes™ he wore when committing the crime.”
The court held that such argument “was improper because it suggests a
course of conduct by the defendant . . . for which there was no
evidence.””’
In a
closely related tactic, prosecutors may instead misuse a piece of
evidence that was
presented at trial. One amazingly creative prosecutor, for
example, argued that a
defense witness’s prior conviction—a conviction admitted into evidence only to
impeach that witness’s credibility”—was somehow evidence that the defendant
was guilty of the crime for which he was on trial.” Regardless of
whether the prosecutor is creating evidence out of thin air or misusing real
evidence that was introduced at trial, both forms of argument are prejudicial and
improper.
 G.Misstating
the Law 
Applying
the law to the facts of the case is proper argument; misstating
the law when doing so,
however, is not. Prosecutors have misstated nearly every imaginable legal standard,
including the law of affirmative defenses'™ and of lesser-included
crimes.'” But the height of sophistry can be found in prosecutors’
misstatements of the burden of proof.
Prosecutors commonly attempt to
lower the government’s burden of proof, thus raising the odds of
winning a conviction. For example, one Washington prosecutor argued that
the jury’s duty in reaching its verdict was to “search for the truth.”'”*
The appellate court, however, rightly stated that this argument “misstates the
jury’s duty and sweeps aside the State’s burden.”'” Or, as one federal court
explained, “‘seeking the truth’ suggests
94. Id.
(emphasis added).
95. State
v. Singh, 793 A.2d 226, 243 (Conn. 2002).
96.
Id.
97. Id.
(emphasis added). 98. See
FED. R. EVID. 609.
99.
United States v. Mitchell, 1 F.3d 235 (4th Cir. 1993).
100. See,
e.g., State v. Bougneit, 294 N.W.2d 675 (Wis. Ct. App. 1980).
101. See,
e.g., State v. Neuser, 528 N.W.2d 49 (Wis. Ct. App. 1995).
102. State v. Berube, 286
P.3d 402, 411 (Wash. Ct. App. 2012).
10